# Figures

Figure 1. Integral mtDNA mutational spectrum of chordate species based on CytB. (a) an average 12-component mutational spectrum (N = 1697 species); (b) A scheme, visualising symmetrical and asymmetrical parts of a given mutation (e.g. C>T); (c) integral 192-component mutational spectrum (N = 1697 species). Missing 32 bins (4 different contexts in each of 8 transversions) are explained by the absence of possible synonymous substitutions in such contexts due to genetic code properties (see details in Supplementary Fig. S3).

Figure 2. Pairwise comparisons of mutational spectra of five chordate classes and human cancer samples. Cosine similarity  of Jackknife samples underpinned the analysis (refer to Methods for details). (a) The similarity based on mutational spectra of transitions, comprising 64 components. Each box contains the quartiles (Q1, median (Q2), and Q3), representing the similarity distributions across samples. (b) The similarity grounded on distinct transition types within the mutational spectra, featuring 16 components for each transition. Numbers in boxes indicate medians. Notably, the GH>AH spectra are more conserved than CH>TH ones (see text for details). See Supplementary Figure S9 for the similar analyses based on all types of substitutions (192 components) and transversion only (128 components).

Figure 3. Deconvolution of 192-Component Mutational Spectra into COSMIC Single Base Substitution Signatures (SBS). (a) The 192-component spectrum of the mitochondria is divided into three groups — "high", "low", and "diff" — for signature analysis (see details in the text). (b) Analysis of the trinucleotide pattern of AP sites within coding sequences of both the heavy and light strands reveals that trinucleotides on the heavy strand exhibit higher levels of damage, with G being the most frequently damaged nucleotide. (c) The signature assignment outcomes from the SigProfilerAssignment (top panel) and mSigAct (bottom panel). (d) Main COSMIC signatures assigned to mtDNA mutational spectra of chordate classes. Pattern of SBS30: BER deficiency mutations. Pattern of SBS44, SBS26 and SBS6: MMR deficiency mutations. Pattern of SBS12: ssDNA-specific mutations (Forbes et al. 2017).

Figure 4. Comparison of the mitochondrial asymmetry based on the global mitochondrial mutational spectrum with the T and R asymmetries in nDNA (each dot represents substitution type with a context).  (a) The analysis of the mitochondrial asymmetry reveals a notable positive correlation with both T (upper panel, Spearman’s Rho =0.44, p = 2.8*e-05, N = 80) and R (bottom panel, Spearman’s Rho = 0.38, p = 0.0005, N = 80) nuclear asymmetries. The elimination of zero-rated substitutions (rare transversions, never observed in chordates) from the mito-asymmetry significantly improved the positive associations with both T- (Spearman’s Rho = 0.74, p = 9.1*e-13, N = 68) and R-asymmetry (Spearman’s Rho = 0.74, p = 8.1*e-13, N = 68). (b) Direct comparison of mitochondrial asymmetries between warm- (birds) and cold- (fishes) blooded species shows an increased strength of the asymmetry in warm-blooded (the ratio is higher than one) (Wilcoxon test, p = 3.09e-05, N=60). Similar trend is observed for high versus low TSSS regions (Wilcoxon test, p = 0.06, N=34). (с) Among the six primary substitution types, a robust association is observed between mito-asymmetry and T (left panel) and R (right panel) asymmetries, superseding the influence of nucleotide content.

Figure 5. Graphical visualisation of the main mutational signatures in mtDNA: (i) symmetrical mutations, predominantly C>T, A>G and rare transversions (grey component), linked to POLG's replication errors; (ii) asymmetrical C>T mutations (red component), indicative of single-stranded DNA damage; (iii) asymmetrical A>G mutations (red component), also resulting from single-stranded DNA damage but particularly influenced by metabolic and age-specific mitochondrial environment.